*It is always good to know what is the history of a technology.*

Week 1:

Introduction: Relational Data Model (RDM)

[PL/SQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PL/SQL)

Orignal databases were acutally indexed files.
Indian Railway still runs on this system. (Fortran) Written in the 1980s.

You need a developer to get the files.
Data Integrity:  You ahve to manually make sure everythin is correct.  Concurrent access to the data.

store date retrieve data is a database might as well be a file system.

DBMS == DataBase Management Systesm
The whole data management aspect.
Security: How you control who accesses what data.
Backup
Data Loss

RDBS is the first database that seperate the logical design of the system and the physical desin of a system.

Relational Model made around late 1970s got popular around 1985
----------------
Logically in this database everything is a table.  We don't need to understand the hardware side of how a RDBS works.
Relation basically means Table

Helps us focus more on the data than on the storage.

(each processor has its own assemply language) Not important for class but intersting.


Rows are sometimes called a n-tuples, columns are something a field or attribute.
One row is one instance.

Null the data never exists.  Null != 0 duh!
Have to explicitely set not null.

Rows techinally do not have an order.

formal    | informal
----------|---------
relation  | table
attribute | column
tuple     | row

each column can be represented as A1, A2, ... An

R = (A1, A2, ... An) relation Schema

R is a subset of the complete set, the complete set is the number of unique values in each column multiplies by each other. (The different combinations also called the Domain)

When you are designing the sotrag you have to think about what is the maximum different values possible. (The full domain space).
This is my current subset/relation but it could go all the way up to the domain space.

current_values == realtion instance

and element t of r is a tuple or row in a table.

a *key* is a subset of a relation schema (another words, a group of column(s) in a table.)
a *superkey* is a key that is unique (can identify a row), biggest superkey is the whole row.
a *candidate key* is a candidate for the *primary key*. It is the minimal subset, the most minimal superkey. so usually one column but not always.
*primary key* is the uniquely identifying key.
*foreign key* constract connects two relations with key value of one relation appearing in another.

Uniary operator = acts on one object
Binary operator = acts on two objects

Selection returns rows (or a subset of the relation's tuples)
Projects returns columns (or a subset of the relation's attributes)
Cartesian product Returns all pairs of rows from two relations.  5 x 5 and 4 x 5 == 20 x 10 (does the join)
Union: out put of union of rows from two relationships.  Just combine everything (don't do the join) gives 9 x 10
Intersectin: the commanality of two tables
Difference: The different values.
Natural Join: output pairs of rows thwith matching values.

SQL language is a hight leveled structured query language.
it is a declarative language rahten than procederal.
The query optimizer considers alternative execution plans picking the most effecient plan for the query.
