# Entity Relationship Model

Requirements Analysis
- Interact with and interview the expert users (the main users)

1. Conceptual Model
- Develop a conceptual database schema.
- Entity-Relationship Model (How the data is structured).
- Independent of the actual implementation, can be uses on RDMS, NoSQL, etc.

2. Logical (or Representational) Model
- Network, Hierarchical, Relation, Object...
- Really relational model 99% of the time.

3. Physical Model
- Choose storarge structures and file organizations.
- Design index structures and consider performance.


# Conceptual Design

## ER Model

ER Model Entity-relationship model.  Works with both relational and NoSQL and other models.
- It is helpful in modeling "real world" Phenomena.
- Very useful communication tools for user, designers, and developers.
- Database systems can be very complex with hundres or thousand of table data.
  -- ER diagrams are easily decomposed, so that only the essential data elements need be considered.
- ER model is a natural fit with the relational model, bu far the most widely used technology.
- ER model also seems useful with newer NoSQL dbs.

Two parts of components in ER Model.
### Entities
- Is an object or "thing" (typically a noun) that exists and is distinguishable from other objects.

Entity Set: A collection of entities of the same type that share the same properties or attributes.
   (A bunch of similiar objects). All movies, or cast memebers, or stars.

Represented by a Rectangle with a name in it. ERD.

---------
- Movie -
---------

An entity has attributes, typeically simple values like integers, strings, or dates.
A Domain is a set of permitted values for an Attribute.
You have to be careful in setting the domain. (y2k)
Attributes can be derive from other attributes. (release date can be used to derive the movie age).
Attributes are in ovals in ERDS connected to the Entity. Also can use concise tabular notation.

Composite Attributes: Address for example.  Have addrss, city, state, zip code, etc.
Many databases let you define a data type (Instead of string you could have an Address type).

Multi Value attributes, multiple phone addresses and email addresses. If it is there identify it is possible.

Derive (or Computed) Attributes
- Example: Age can be computed from date of birth


### Relationships

An association between the entity sets. Example Casts "act" in Movies.

The current "value" of a relationship is a relationship set
with each element being a tuple/row that connects specific entities from the realted entity sets

Relations can also have attributes.
Fans can View movie on a date.
View is in the diamond with a oval of date under it, between the two squares of fans and movies.


Represented by a diamond with lines connecting to the entity sets in entity-relationship diagrams (ERDs)
A relationship gives you a snapshot over time (its not permanent)

You should never have a hanging entity (an entity without a relationship)
If it is a single application there should not be any disjoint entites either.
There should be a relationship path from every entity to the others.

The *degree* of a relationship quantifies the number of entities involved.

2 are Binary relationships.
Ternary relationships are three way relationships.

A Unary relationship are where two entites are related in different ways to each other.

Movies and Sequal.  One movie in the table is the squel to another movie in the same table.  Star Wars and Start Wars II

*Cardinality* constraints restrict the number of entities that can be realted to sa specific entity from each entity set.

1:1 one to one
1:N many to one
M:N many to many

Modality: Optional or Mandatory

Many to Many.  Many movies to many locations.
One to Many. A single director directs one movie     Director <----- direct ----- Movies
Arrow denotes the side of the one.

If it is One to One, arrow on both sides.
Arrows denot both sides as "one" cardinality.

Two entities can have more than once relationship
Any two key ID fields determines the third.

A cast can play one role in one movie. But each movie and cast can have multiple roles.

Many to Many to all three entities is impossible (I think?!)

----

One of the candidate keys is selected as the primary key for then entity set.
Primary keys are indexed.

Primary key is more of a design choice.  You may not know if it is unique until you get more data.

With a film you have title and year.  So a "film id" attribute would be a "synthetic key".

A weak entity set depends on antoher entity set for help in forming a primary key that uniquly identifies entities.
Example: Orders are made up of order details or items.
Double box indicated the weak entity and a doubleline to the realtion is total participation.
Try to limit the use of weak entities.

An *associative entity set* is implicit in manay to manay relationship ( a form of weak entity set)
example: Fans like manay movies and movers are like by many fans.
The key will at least include a fan id and a movie id.

---

Use multiple documents and show the users.  Use color to annotate major functional areas.
You do not need to put all the attributes on the ER diagram.  Keep it simple stupid.
Use some data to test your design.

ER DIAGRAM IS A COMMUNICATION TOOL.  If you cannot communicate with non technical people, otherwise it is useless.


# Logical Model

## Design Tips

Avoid redundancy.  Redundant data wastes time and space and thought.
Use weak entities sparingly (only when necessary)
- We oftern create synthetic keys for entity sets.
Use simple attributes whenever entity sets are not necessary.
- Sometimes all you need is attribute data, not another full-blown entity.

And entity set should be more than just the name of something.

Each entity becomes a table (with a key)
Represent Relationships: As tables or common attributes/keys
Normalize relations: remove unwanted redundancy.
Merge relations: Remove redundant tables.

One to Many bring the key from the one side realtion to the many side relation.
Many to Many relationship  a new table is created with two keys,
primary keys from each entity and any additional attributes.

One to One relationships can remain sperate or be combines(a space/ join tradeoff)
You could put both tables together. or leave them seperate but it would need a join (join is costly)
If they stay together with many attributes it could get expensive.

A foreignkey in Beers to brewers.  One to Many
A Synthetic Primary key is added to each realtion/table.

```sql
CREATE TABLE beers (
  beer_id NUMBER NOT NULL,
  beer_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
  abv NUMBER(10,2)
  CONTRAINT beers_pk PRIMARY_KEY (beer_id) 
)
```

Composite Keys are the keys that identify the two entites in a many to many relation.
Redundancy makes data integrity difficult.
  
How to do design a Ternary Relationship.
The relationship table has 3 foreign keys to the other entities.

*Integrity Constraints* allow business rules that affect data quality to be resident
in the database infrstructure, there are many advantages when using integrity constraints.

Constraints can be managed with a rich set of admin feautres and constraint types.

### Constraints

A primary key constraint automatically creats an index on the key attribuets.

`ALTER TABLE beers ADD PRIMRY KEY (beer_id)`

Add a foreign key constraint.
`ALTER TABLE beers ADD FOREIGN KEY (brewer_id) REFERENCES brewers(brewer_id);

The default behavior is to not allow deletions that violate a constraint. Orphaned. (DELETE NO ACTION)
Other behaviors can delet all referenced rows (DELETE CASCADE) or use nulls (DELETE SET NULL).

How to force that a table is not null.
`ALTER TABLE fans MODIFY (email NOT NULL)`;

UNIQUE key constraint

`ALTER TABLE representatives ADD CHECK (salary > 0 OR commission >= 0);`

You can turn on and turn off constraints on particular attributes.
`ALTER TABLE beers ENABLE (or DISABLE) CONSTRAINT cnam_chk;`
You probably want to turn off constraints when doing a batch load.
Other wise it is slow because it is doing all checks.

An *exception table* can be created to catch and help with any remidial
processing required for constraint management.

You can delare constants on view, but it does not help with data integrity.
It needs to be on the table itself.

# 


# Non class related

Computers just do what we do in the real world, just automatically and faster.
