# Indexes

# Types of indexes

An index is an ordered list of a particular attribute.
Also, an index is a **optional** data structue that allows us to map a key value to a physical locatoins (NFL - no free lunch)
- Requires additional storage
- Requires additinoal acesses for retrieval. (gets the index, then the data from the hard disk)
- Must be updated with database.

Without an index we are talking abut n/2 speed.
With an index we get log n speed.

Provides "indirect" random access to any tuple via an index table or structure with paired "index entries".
- (search-key, point)

Performance is enhanced if index fits into main memory.
- This may call for a multi-level index structure.
- An index is typically much smaller thatn the underlying file.

If the subset is < 15% of the complete table, then the index helpers.  Otherwise you might as well do a full scan.
There is no point of an index with sequential access. The permformance boost is not there.

You can use HINT in SQL language to tell the SELECT query whether or not to use an index or not.


There are two basic tuypes of indexes:
Ordered index has entried sotred in sorted order based on the search-key with pointers to the underlying data items.
- Since the entries are ordered, range lookups are also support by the index.

A Hash Tables or index is based on a nearly uniform distribution of search-key values accross a collectoin of buckets.
- A search-key value is assigned to a bucker based on a hash function
- A good hash function ensures nearly uniform distribution minimizing "collisions within the buckets".

Hash functions are part of "crytography" obviously.
md5 is a popular hash algorithm it generates a 128bit number.

Hash functions are not used that much in a relational database. Why? Because of the ranged queries
For example:
    SELECT emp_id FORM employees WHERE emp_id <= 4 AND emp_id >=2;

This works very well with a sequentially ordered index.  Not so well with has maps

Side Note: In NoSQL db a hash function is way faster.  Because sequentially scanning 1 Billion indexes is pretty slow.
Grabbing each individual entry via a hash map can be faster.

## Ordered Indexes

Primary Index: is based on search-key attrs that are used to physically order the data in the underlying table.
- So ther can only be one such index (usually the primary key)
- A primary index is also called a "clustering index".

One or more secondary indexes can be based on non-ordering attributes, bot unique and non-unique.
- The secondary index specifies an order that is different from the underlying table.
- An "index-sequential file" is a swquentially ordered file with a primary index.

http://www.cs.sfu.ca/CourseCentral/354/zaiane/material/notes/Chapter11/node5.html

Sparse Index
- One entry per block.
- Records in physical order bby attribute.
- Pointer is usually direct to a block and records.
- One per table or file since we use the physical ordering.
- The resulting index is much smaller depending on the blocking factor.

Dense Index
- Usually done on a secondary key.
- Indirectly uses the primary key.
- One entry per record.
- No ordereing attr.
- Pointer is usually indeirect (uses primary index).
From the secondary key you grab the primary key from that block and then go featch the record.

Indirect Index is to another index.
Direct Index is to the actual record.


Logical Level
- Single columns or Composite (concatenated) are possible but order matters (composite example: name, address)
- Indexes can be unique or non-unique (with repeated search-key values)

Physical Level
- As just discusses, indexex can be sparse or dense.
- Indexes can has a single or multiple lebels (fanout)
- Indexes may be paritioned or non-partitiond, just like the underlying tables.
- Different physical organizations are possible, suc as index sequential structures, B-trees (normal or reverse) or bitmaps.

# B-Tree Indexes

B-trees are the most widely used index (typical default)

Index-sequential fiels
- performance degrades as new overflow nodes are added
- the entire file must be periodically organized

Not very good if you are doing a lot of inserts and deletes.

B-tree index
- Performance is maintained as the structure grows
- Tree is constantly re-organized with localized changes resulting from insertions and deletions
- No structure wide reorganization; a big advantage.
- Imposed some overhead as insetions and deletions are processed.

Definitions
"degree": how many children a particular node may have
"depth": how many levels down
"path": A -> B -> D (thats an example)
"node values": the splitting location of a node for its branches.
"leaf nodes": bottom nodes, typically the actual values of the entries

"balanced tree": each leaf node has the same path length.

Why balanced trees?
- Predictable access times
- Each node that is not a leaf has least n/2 and at most n chilfren where n is the order of the B-tree
- Leaf nodes contain at least (n-1)/2 and at most n-1 pointers to data record locations.

We want a leaf node to always have a value.  So we limit the max and min of the leaf nodes.

Why B+-trees?
- Really these are "B+-tree" indexes with pointers linking the leaf nodes.
  - This enhanced structure really helpers with range queries.

SQL Server using B-tree srtucture for indexes.
B-Tree indexes use a large amount of space.  Typically we index pk, fk, and a few select columns for non-data warehousing application.

B-Trees are suited for high-cardinality attrs. (Cardinality, DISTINCT available values.)
Is the default in most cases
For each pk and unique constraint, Oracle (implicitly) creates a B-tree index.
- Every insertion must be checked against the primary key integrity constraint for uniquness, a very expensive propositions without an index.
Order matters in multi-column composite indexes
- If the leading edge of a B-tree index is not referenced, the index is not utilized. (This is not true in the newest version of Oracle)

Reverse key b-tree index: When the data is sequential and the tree is becoming unbalanced, we flip the data and it becomes more evenly distributed (usually)
- Used when we are inserting data sequentially.

You specifically have to say REVERSE INDEX to do a reverse index.

`CREATE INDEX hr.emp_lname_idx ON hr.employees (last_name) REVERSE`

Side Note: Do not use autonumber in production because it screws up b-trees, also it is a slight security flaw as client_ids are guessable.

# Seek vs Scan

"Seek"
- A targeted operation that rerieves a few values directly from a database object, such as a index
- SQL Server: Clustered Index Seek
- Does not require reading each entry

"Scan"
- A general search operation that scans all the data in an object while retrieving the desired items.
- SQL Server:  Clustered Index Scan
- Oracle: Table Access (Full)

SQL SERVER supports two basic typs of indexing
Clustered Indexes store the actual table data pages at the leaf level (with the data physically ordered by the key)

Pages at the leaf level contain either a reference (indirect) to a clustered indexx
cluster == pk
non-cluster == secondary

Cluster index scan means it is scanning over the leaf nodes of a B+-tree (a full table scan).
You should never have up to 249 non-clustered indexes per table

Covering Index: When all of the required columns are part of the index.  An index key can contain up to 16 columns and be 900 bytes wide. 

Leaf Nodes are structures as:
- Index Entry Header
- Key column length
- Key column value
- Items stored in that block.

In some applicatoins Bitmap Indexes are more efficient
- A newer for of indexing that is very appropriate for data warehouses.
- In constrast with B-tree indexes, butmapped idexes are good for low cardinality attrs (< 1%, if you have a 1000 rows you have 10 values)
- Examples (Gender, y/n, categorical attrs)
- Usually done by a 0 1 index. If 4 types then 00, 01, 10, 11. etc.
- This makes it much faster because computers are built on a bit system.

Key: color (blue)
start: row id (10.0.3)
end: row id (12.8.3)
bitmap: 100010010000100100100.  (Each one would be where in the row where that color would be.)

Updates on keys very expensive.
Efficient for AND/OR evaluation
Usefull for DW/DSS enviroment - B-trees better for OLTP environment.

`CREATE BITMAP INDEX scott.ord_region_id_idx ON scott.ord(region_id)`.
`CREATE INDEX` defaults to creating a B-Tree index.

"Rules of the game"
1. Must have a index in pk.
2. Specify indices for FK that are used for joining tables.
3. Index on nonkey attrs are used frequently for criteria on grouping.
- Create an index if you frequently want to retrieve less than 15% of the rows of a large table.

Columns with the follow are good candidates for indexes
- Relaatively unique values.
- A wider range or values: Btree
- A small range of values: Bitmap
- Many null values but queries select the values.
Drop any indexes that are not being used.
Indexes can sonsume a large amount of space and impose overhead costs as data changes.

Often useful to create a simple composite index based on severl attrs
Given two attrs A1, A2
If one index and the other does not we can access the index first (say A1) and then search the selected rows for a specfic value of A2.
Composite Indexes support specific queries well, but are not as flexible for a wide range of models.
- Attr order matters, so the leading-edge attribute must be used in any queries.

Function based indexes can importve query performance
`CREATE INDEX area_index ON rivers(area(geo));`
```sql
SELECT
    id,
    geo,
    area(geo),
FROM rivers
WHERE area(geo) > 5000;
```

Read/Write Tradeoff
- There is often a tradeoff between improving perf of read vs write.
- Tables can have many indexes, but more indexes means more overhead when the table is modified.
  - Drop indexes for large data load operations.
- More indexes (especially targeted for expensive queries) can improve data retrieval for read operations.
  - Consider creating specific indexes for expensive reportin queries.

To eleminate or reduce fragmentation, you can rebuild or coalesce the index.  But before you perform either task, weight the costs and benifits of each option and choose one that works best for your situation.

`ALTER INDEX scott.ord_region_id_idx REBUILD TABLESPACE indx02;`
`ANALYZE INDEX scott.ord_region_id_idx VALIDATE STRUCTURE;` This is to test that the index is correct and not corrupted.
`DROP INDEX scott.ord_region_id_idx;`

The index can lose its acquired space efficiently over time.  Monittor index efficiency of space usage at regular intervals.
`SELECT PCT_USED FROM INDEX_STATS WHERE NAME = 'index';`

Indexes are one of the primary methods for improving query performance.

Index structures can consume a lot of space and impose maintence and overhead costs.
- Monitor and manage index structures
- Remove unnecessary index structures
