# PSQL Do not use it does now make sense because everything can just be done
# Application side.

CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE hello_world
AS
BEGIN
  dbms_output.put_line('hello world')
END hello_world;


EXECUTE hello_world();


CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE hello_world
AS
BEGIN
  dbms_output.put_line('hello world')
  dbms_output.put_line('Server Time ' ||
    TO_CHAR(SYSDATE, 'MM-DD-YYY HH23:MI:SS')
END hello_world;


CREATE TABLE fans AS 
SELECT * FROM reldb.fans;  /* Does not preserve constraints */



# Internal Database Architecture.

Computation/Communicatoin       


Traditional DBS are single processor centralized db

Db arc are impletented in *tiers* or logincal groupings of services.

A 3-tiered architecture isolates the desktop or end user, application code and database services.

A logical tier is typically composed of miltiple computing nodes or servers.

Oracle uses a global *shared memory* for inter-process communications IPC divided into different components.

*Server processess* interact with the user process to provide access to the database. (this is the process all clients are interacting with)
*Background processes* provide all database functions. (does all the query optimization, buffer management, etc.)

Shared Memory/System Global Area: A way to have multiple processes running in the same computeer can share data across themselves.
Need this so that the server and background processes can communicate with each other.


Cliden-side user processes interact with the database via server processes
Background-processes provide the datbaase functions such as query processing and optimizatoin database IO security recovery.

1. server proc
2. background proc
3. SGA handle communication
4. A range of database fiels provide persisten storage(data/metadata).

Web apps ofter require large db connections
In order to handel more connections and request conserving resources,
server processes can be shared through *request/response queues* and *dispatchers*
^ The same process can be shared by multiple clients.

External Database files
======================
Database:
one or more data files
one or more control files
two or more online redo logs (Every action is first written into the redo log file)

archived log file (Not part of regular database)

## Instance background processes

Recoverer Process (RECO) - resolveds distributed transaction failures.
Process Monitor (PMON - automated proc cleanup and recovery.
System Monitor (SMON) automated system cleanup and recovery.
Database writers (DBWn) - Writes from cache buffers to data files.
Log Writers (LGWR) - Writes redo log data to squential log files.
Archive Processes (ARCn) - Copies redo log files to backup locations.

## SGA System Global Area

Java Pool - Dedicated memory for Java (JVM) execution
Buffer Cache - Database buffer cache (block oriented) (Where data is first written)
Redo Buffer = Redo (or write ahead) log for after images.
Shared Pool - Library, dictionary, and query result caches.
Streams Pool - Shared buffer for message queues.
Large Pool - Memory for large database operations.

SHARED_POOL_SIZE paramer controls size
Library cache conatins statement text, parsed code and executions plan (Cache for optimizing query execution)
Data dictionary cache contains table and column definitions and privileges.

Self managing databases
Automaic memory mgmt (this can be enabled/disabled) as of 10g allow the DBA to speicify limits SGA_MAX_SIZE and targets SGA_TARGET for shared memory usage,
with the engine dynamically reallocatiing the various regions.

## db buffer cache
stores most recently used blocks
(data that is used often the db will store that information in the buffer cache for quicker access)
One db block is composed of multiple OS blocks.
can be dynamically resized:
  ALTER SYSTEM SET DB_CACHE_SIZE = 96M
Size of the standard buffer based on DB_BLOCK_SIZE
  DB_CACHE_SIZE (default buffer cache)
  DB_KEEP_CACHE_SIZE (keep cache for likely to be reused blocks)
  DB_RECYCLE_CACHE_SIZE (recycle cache for blocks not reused)

It will look in cache for value otherwise it will grab from the hard disk

LRU policy used to manage the cache 
wite list identified modidfied/dirty blocks
LRU list hilds "free" blocks "pinned" in use blocks the odd "dirty" blocks.
In demand blocks move to the MRU end (exempt full table scans - CACHE clause)
Whatever block accesed most recently is stored in the memory, ones not accessed get deleted from the buffer cache.

## Redo log buffer
record the db changes necessary to roll forward during recovery (also called write ahead log)
LOG_BUFFER paramert controls size
Recods changes made through the database instance.
Circular buffer used sequentially.  When out of space it will go back and start deleting the first entries (that is what circular means):

Redo log groups
they are replicated on different devices to ensure availability for database recovery.

## Large Pool
  Optional area to reduct IO background processes LARGE_POOL_SIZE

## Java pool
 optionsal area in teh GRA also
 holds java processes

 ## DB write
 Server proc update undo and data blocks and db buffer cache  DBWn only writes from buffer to actual db storage
 DB writer write when
  - checkpoints occur
  - dirty buffer thresholds are reached
  - free buffer scans take too long
  - changes in tablespace status
  - table drops/truncations.


## Log writer LGWR
does sequential writes from shared memeory disk
Log writes occure when 
- transactions commit
- log buffer is 1/3 full.
- threshold of changes is reached.
- before DBQn werites (can also invoke LGWR).
- Every 3 seconds or so.


## System Monitor (SMON)

The system monitor performs automatic instance recovery when db is reopened
Recovery involves:
- Rolling forword committed transactions using redo logs.
- Applying changes to data blocks.
- Rolling back uncommited transactions.
- Openeing database.
- Free space maintence.

## Process Monitor (PMON)

handles zombie or failed processes by cleaning it up
Clean up includes
- Rolling back uncommited transactions
- Freeing locks and other resources
- Restarting necessary processes (e.g. dispatchers)

## Checkpoint CKPT
Every so ofter every 3 seconds-ish process updateds the control files, noting where recovery should start in the redo logs
involves:
- Updateing control file information
- updateing data file headers with checkpoint information
- signalling DBWn to handle data block writes


## DBMS startup and shutdown

top to bottom: starting up.
bottom to top: shutting down.

SHUTDOWN
NOMOUNT - instance started and dynamic views available from memory
MOUNT - control file opened for this instance with more dynamic views
OPEN - All files opened as described by the control file for this instance.  Data dictionary is accessable

V$ tables are used to store dynamic performance views. example V$PARAMETER V$SGA V$OPTION V$DATABASE
You can use V$ to see who is doing what in the database.


# SELECT UPDATE AND INSERT PROCs

## Query processing

### Select processing
from user process to server process and back.
Parse - Execute - Fetch

### Update processing
1 - Server process gets data from data file.s
2 - Writes that data into the buffer cache.
3 - Accesses Data dictionary and identifies all the tables, fields, indexes, etc. (because the block does not contain that information.)
4 - Updates the Redo log buffer.
5 - Then writes into database buffer cache.

### Rollback Processing
Put the old image block back into the new image where that block with be.

### Commit processing

1. Server process writes to the redo log buffer.
2. The LGWR writes to redo log file.
3. Return info to the user.
4. Then write to the database buffer cache.


# Oracle Storage Architecture

*Primary data files* - Control files
starting point of the other files in the database x.mdf

*Secondary data files* - Data files
Most edited data field x.ndf

*Log files* - Has log files.
Holds all the log information that is used to recover the database x.ldf

All database engines face similar storage challenges

## BEST Hierarchy

We try to store data in a single extent.
(You can specify all this in create table statements)

Blocks
- database blocks consist of multiple OS blocks.
Extent
- Contiguous set of database blocks. Can be accesed by a single physical sequential read of the hard disk.
Segment
- Physical storage for logical database objects (tables). In the hard disk layout, they will reside very close to each other.
Table spaces
- Logical partitions of a database


One Oracle block can become multiple O/S Blocks
One datafile has multiple extents
One table space maps to multiple data files
One table space has many segments one segment has many extents.

## Tablespace
Tablespaces provide a tool for logical database layouts.
A table space can contain many objects (tables, indexes)
A tablespace may be composed of multiple fiels
can be uses to sperate objects with I/O contention.
default SYSTEM tablespaces holds the data dictionary
can group objects with similiar schemas (owners), behaviors, size, loading task, backup reqs, etc.

2 types of tablespaces
Locally manage tablespace
- Free extents are managed within the tablespace
- Bitmap is used to maintain extenst status
- But value indicates free or used
- Reduct contentions

Did not get a changce to write the other down.

Logical blocks  segments

Table table partition clusteer index Large obj
Index orgganized table index partition nested table rollback segment temportary segment.

Segment def
INITIAL
NEXT
MINEXTENTS
MAXEXTENTS
PCTINCREASE

OPTIMAL (for rollback segments)

SQL Server
## Extents
Basic unit in which  space is managed.  8 physically contig

Did not get it all.

Mixed extent, differe objects index and table


All db engines implement I/O using some basic unit like a block or page

Blocks have a header (checksum), free space, and data
parameter INITRANS, MAXTRANS, PCTFREE, PCTUSED

Two block management strategies are used
auto segment space managment
- Most used.

Or manual
use PCTFREE, PCTUSED, FREELIST

PCTFREE & PCTUSED says at what level you have to go into another block for the insert.

SQL server uses the term pages instead of blocks.  Are 8KB hav 128 pages per mb.
Each page begins with a 96byte header.

Logical database layouts
To optimize the database management, use, etc.  You want to setup tablespaces and datafiles to make it faster, etc.

Tablespaces already defined by oracle
SYSTEM 
TOOLS
DATAn
INDEXn
RBSn
TEMPn
You can also create your own.

I/O bottlenecks or hostposts based on usage.
I/O contention among database files.
- concurrent access.
- asynchroneous interferne.
DBMS concurrent I/O requests.
Security, Recovery, and performance goals.
OS & BMS: locatoin and protection.
Hardware, OS, & DBMS: mirroring/RAID scheme.


## Data dictionary views

DBA_xx every object in whole database:
   ALL_xx objects that can be accessed by the user
      USER_xx objects owned by the user

Dynamic performance views are stored in the V$
