Distributed Database

"A logically iterrelated collection of shared data, physically distributed over a computer network."

"A distributed database is a collection of data that belongs logically to the same system but is physically spread over the sites of a computer network."

A distributed database has one "complete view".

distributed database system != database replication

In a pure distributed data, the system manages a single copy of all data and supporting database objects.

Typically distrbuted database applications use distributed tramsactions to access both local and remote data and modify the global database in real time.

- Degree of homogeneity: homogeneous vs heterogeneous databases
  Homogenity means all the same type of operating system and datbases. hetero, one db instance could be mysql, another oracle
- Degree of autonomy: centralized versus gederated databases 
  How seperate are the databse nodes.  Can I update one with effecting or alerting the others ?  Completed segregated if it doesnt have to talk to other servers.  Not autonomous if it needs to communicate.
- Degree of integration: transparency: integrated or seperated schemas
   Is there a link of the chema or are they completing different.  If there is linking (byu relations for example) between the tables on the different nodes then it is integrated not seperated.


Reliability:
- Probability the system is running at a particular moment
Availability:
- Probability of continuously running during an interval.
Performance:
- Local processing and the potential for parallelism.
Overhead
- Local and global transactions require consistent database.

Strive for location transparency: Means you know that this particular data is in one server, this other particular data is in this other server.
- reliability/availability: If the client does not know the locality it will just go to the closet serve, this lowers reliability and availability
- Local control
- Modular growth
- Low comm costs (moving target)
- Fast response (good desing)

Pitfalls of complexity:
- Software cost/complexity
- Data integrity
- Processing Overhead (coordination Costs)
- Slow Response (Bad Design)


Network Transparency

Naming Database Objects
Example convention: Tablename.Servername
- Unnique system wide names
- effecient name resolution
- location and migration independence
- local naming autonomy

Data distribution independence
- Replication
  A particular part of the database might have more replicas.
- Fragmentation
- Location


Database object sysnonems

"For a client application the location and platform of the databases are transparent.  you can also create snonyms for remote objects in the distrubted system so that userws can acces them with the same syntax as local objects."
If you do not have a synonym the query will always use the local version.

Centralized:
  all data located at a single site
Replicated 
  Full db distirbuted to multiple sites
Fragmented (parittioned)
  db is divided onto non-voverlapping partions.

Replicated databases
+ reliability
+ efficiency (physical proximiity)
- storage requirements
- data integrity (update complexity)

Framented
+ efficieny
+ local otimzation
+ security
- unpredictable access times
- backup vulnerability (No replication)
Horizontal fragments (related Rows)
Vertical fragments (realted columns)

Dsitrbuted query processing

Whate are the new costs and benefits?
- the communication costs involved in shipping data between sites
+ The gain in performance that may accrute via coarse-grained parallelism across sites

Distibuted Join Processing (semi-join strategy) it is always costly.
1. We want r1 join r2 (with schemas R! and R2)
2. Compute temp1 at site1
3. Ship temp1 from site1 to site2
4. Compute temp2 by r2 join temp1 at site2
5 Ship temp2 from site 2 to site2
6. Computte r1 join temp2 at site1


TRansactions apn database boundaries requiring "database links" and higher level transaction management.

Concurrency control: Two phase commit (2PC) or the 3-phase commit (3PC)

Coordinator node: the node where the client is connecting to and where the query is running.

PHASE 1:
The coordinator sends a prepare statement to participant nodes.  If the prepare is successfu the the participant respons with ready, otherwise abort.
PHASE 2:
If all ready then coordinator sends a commit otherwise it sends a rollback.

If the coordinator does not receive a response then assumes an abort.
if <commit t> in site log then redo the transactions.
if <abort t> then undo/rolback the transaction.
if <ready t> then the site needs to investigate the transactions status.  The site can query other sites or the coordinator for logged <commit t> or <rollback t> decision.

Coordinator failute and recovery
If any site has a <commit t> then commit
If any site has an <abort t> then abort and rollback
If any site does not have a <ready t> then safe to rollback since no commit decision could have been made.
If all sites have <ready t> and no other information no decision can be made without the coordinator.
So just wait ..

In doubt transactions have <readt t> but no other information.
Normal transaction processing cannot proceeduntil all in dbout transactions are commited or rolled back.
Resolving in doubt transactions can be time consumin! If the coordinator is the only information source, the site will block.

Three Phase commit
Phase 1 as before
Phase 2 add a <pre-commit t> rather than <commit t>, so an abort is still possible.  The sites return <ready t>.
Phase 3 specifies a <commit t> if all sites have acknoledged with a <ready t>.
The <ready t > is a promise by a site and the <pre-commit t> is a promis by the coordinator.  If the coordinator fails, a new coordinator can be chosen. (using the record of promises and coordinator failure protocol)

Date s 12 objectives
1. Local Autonomy
- Each site is autonomous
2. No reliance on central site
- No "master" site - all sites have same functionality.
3. Continuous operation
- strive for reliability and availability.
4. Location transparency
Users are not concerned with data location.
5. Fragmentation independed
- users not concerned with partitions.
6. Replication Transparency
-Multiple copies are transparent to the user.
7. Distributed query processing
- queries across multiple sites.
8. Distributed Transaction management
- recovery
-locking etc
9. Hardware Independence
10. Operating system independence
11: Network Independence
12 DBMS independence

Simple Network
or
Complex Network
Client can be a think client or a PC
middle tiwer can contain applications and services
Database server stores the actual data.

Oracle networking

Application || Server
OCI Layer - is an API Layer (and a library)
Two Task Common
TNS - Network layer
OPA - Authentication layer
Protocol

TNS Listener: Default port 1521

Request goes to TNS listener.  THe listenser spawns a server process.  From now on all the client direction goes to the process directly.
Redirect Sessoin (dispatcher) one dispatcher can handle multiple clients.  The listener connects client to dispatcher with the least clients.

Shared server processes

Connection poolling.  The same connection is being ustilized by multiple threads in the client.

Connection Manager: Between client and the server.  All clients connect with connection manager and that manager communicates with the listeners of the different database servers.

Configuring Connection Manager

ORACLE
Client <-> Middle tier <-> client
tnsnames.ora (in the client, knows about the where the different nodes are.)
cman.ora(knows the transfer protocol and is in the middle tier)
one init.ora per database instance (The specification of the database instaace
listener.ora (defines the network communication protocal of the database)
