Exponential growth of volume of data generated by users, systems, sensors
- online interactions
- sensing devices - RFID
- Social network interactions
Open and standardized access to data sources form a large number of different systems
- XML
- JSON
- Web Services
- Service oriented architecture

Relational databases has a lock and transactions that is what makes them slow.

RDBMS are weak in clustering it doesnt scale linearly, there is a lot of extra managements
and it doesnt sclae horizontally.
- Adding 1 more node to a single MySQL db server doest make the performance two times.
Strict data format - suitable for structured data only.  You have to know how the data is coming to you.

Why
- Strict ACID rules in relational database
  - Atomicity, concurrency, isolation and durability
  - Due to acid rules every data needs to be synchronized across all clusters before a transactoin is completed
    - adds overdead to the database system making linear scaling impossible to achieve


No-SQL Database
- Relaxed ACID property
- Distributed across multiple nodes
- Scaling is more important than perfect synchronization
- Semi-strict data format -suitable for unstructured data


- Key-Value Stores
Distributed hash-table
Has no processing power on the value.  Given a key can only retrieve a key.
Get for pointed queries. Where you have the key.
Redis 
voldemort
berkeleyDB
Riak

Usage
- User profiles, session data, production information

- Document Databases
Both key and values are searchable
value - semi-structured data (name, value) pair
value column may vary from row to row as the JSON data may be of different size
typical value- JSON XML BSON (BINARY JSON)
MongoDB
CouchDB
Storing and managing text documents, email mesages, XML documents
It is possible to create additional indexes on top of the fields in the value.

- Wide-Column (or column family) stores
key-value pair
value - wide column
- multiple column and value pair
- super column -collection of a set of column
- schema-less nature so that each of their rows can contain a different number of columns

Super column Name
 first name
 last name
Super column address
 city 
 country
 zip

Column family - Table
super column family / super column - column familiyt within a column family

example:
google big table
cassandra
dynamo DB
Hbase

- Graph database
Structured relational grapsh of interconnected key-value paris
- edges - relationship
- node - attributes (key-value)

application
- social media network analysis
- exploring relationships
- web browsing behavior analysis


# Cassandra

- Keysapce
 - Column family / Table
   - rows
     - columns

Consistncy level (CL) client specifies per read and right

ALL = All replicas acknowlege.
QUORUM = > 51% of replicas acknowledged.
LOCAL_QUORUM = > 51% of replicas in local data center acknowledged.
ONE = Only one replica acknoledges.

# MongoDB

MongoDB you can run javascript applications.  You can write a complex query using javascript. 
You can do different types of searches:
- Text Search
- Geospatial
- Aggregation
- Rich Queries
- Map Reduce

Different types of sharding
- Range-based sharding
- Hash-based sharding
- Location-based sharding

Transaction model
- MongoDB provides ACID properties at the document level only.  The whole document will be written or not written
Replica sets
- MongoDB maintains multiple copies of data called replica sets using native replication
In-memory performance with on-disk capacity
Security
- Authentication
- Authorizatoin
- Auditing
- Encryption

Drive (client) communicates with the Mongos (or Nodes) which will read and write form the various shards.


HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System)
HBase is on top of HDFS

Different blocks of a file are being written into seperate nodes.
Because of this, the size of the file is no longer limited.  HDFS gives you a "one file system view" (logical view) that is actually many files sytems combines together.

