# Challenges of Large Software:

- Distributed Real time system
- Human comprehension
- Growth in hardware complexity(doubles every 18 month)
- Lack of standarization (The key is standardization)
- Lack of Mestument (time and cost are hard to estimate without the empirical knowledge of the organization's capabilities.

Salesforce.com (CRM)
Each company would try to have their own CRM before Salesforce.
It was the first SaaS model.

Moore's Law (not a law, more of an empirical observation).
Hardware vendors take the lead, because software cannot run without hardware to run on.

Can think of software as distributed and as layers w/hardware being the bottom layer.


# Largest Software Failures in history.

Done by the military.  The military is the largest single software development company in the world.
It has to be highly distributed, without error, and highly secure.


# Case Study: Denver Airport
- Baggage delivered by 4000 automated "tele cars".
- 100 computers controlled movement using electric eyes, bar-code censors, and radio receivers.
- Considered a large failure

# Impact of software failures.
- 55% of projects cost more than expected.
- 68% took longer than estimated to complete.
- 88% of projects had to be substantially redesigned

## Failed projects are not used
- 75% of large projects are operating failures or not used at all.

## Public Safety can be affted
- Trains
- Aviation
- Life support
- Nulclear power plants

# Federal viation Administration
- 2.6 Billion dollar project
- 1 millinon lines of code, 100s of computers
- 57% of bugher wasted according to (GAO)
- 2/3 of project is cancelled, res is late
- Reasons for failure
  - FAA assumed that IBM would use engineering techniques.
  - GOA reports that human factors were the main reson for failure.

# Engineering Approach

Brad cox - Got to leave the pre industrial software development process
- systematic
  - establish standard practices.
  - allow repeatable results.
- quantifiable

Improve the process

# Capability Maturity Model
- Developed by SEI
- Defines level of maturity from 1 to 5.

With Raytheon:
- most projects completed ahdead of scheduyle and under budget
- productivity doubled
- savings of $7.80 for every dollar invested in CMM

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capability_Maturity_Model

## Maturity levels
### Initial
### Managed
### Defined
### Quantitatvely Managed
### Optimizing

In 1994, two CMM level 5 organizations
In 2005 there are 85

## Why are not many companies at CMM 5 especially if it is valuable.

It is expensive in terms of time.
Hard to get developer buy-in.

# Traditional Development method:  Waterfall Method
- Requirements analysis
- Analysis Speicifactions
- Deisgn Speicifcations
- Coding
  - Unit testing
  - System Testing
  - UAT Testing
  - Ship it

Bigget weakness is it does not exploit the ablility to modify a software product in production.
Waterfall is  Structured analysis problem.

It gives you a false sense of security. Because testing if it provides the user with value is left until the end.

# RUP (Rational Unified Process)

Iterative development.  You look at software as a bunch of different components you put together.

- Iterative Development
- Requirements Management
- Component-Based Architectual Vision
- Visual Modeling os Systmes
- Quality Management
- Change Controle Management

Stacks the phases of the waterfall method.

Phases:

- Inception
  - Get buyin
  - Capture initial requirments
  - Cost benifit analysis
  - Initial risk analysis
  REST ONLINE...

- Elaboration
  - Use case analysis
    - Use case model
      - Primary vehicle for reqs capture. (Helps the client understand the use cases)
      - Describe WHAT the system will do, not HOW that will be done.
    - Scenarios
  - Develop a glossary of terms
  - Domain Model
    - understnad the problem and the systems requirements as they exist within the contet of the problem
  - Risk assement plan
  - Architecture document
- Construction
  - Desinginng and building the product 
- Transition
  - Shipping the project

## Iterative Development Process
40% of requirements come after analysis phase.
Promotes early risk mitigation, by breadking down the system into mini projects.
Allows the process to modulate with each iteration, allowing you to correct errors sooner.

## Incremental Development Process:
Build in small components

## Goals of each iteration:
- Slowly chip away at risks facing the project, namely:
  - Performance Risk
  - Integration Risk
  - Conceptual Risk
- Perform a mini waterfall that ends with a small deliverable that can be iterated on.
- Its an incremental improvement of the system as opposed to a "Big-Bang" project delivery,
where you recive it all at once.

# AGILE

Is a way of doing processes

The ability to create and reesponse to change in order to profit in a turbulent business environment.
Respond to change quickly
They do not look a the process in a vertical way.
Charodic: exhibits properties of both chaos and order.
Things get done because people adapt, not because they slavishly follow processes.

Software is developed during one unit of time and is referred to an iteration, which may last one to four weeks.
Emphasizes working software as the primary measure of progress.
Lot more interaction with the client

Characteristics:
- Light weighted methodolody
- Smalle to medium sized temas
- Vague and changing reqs
- vauge and changing techniques
- simple design
- minimal system into produciton

- Moduleare
- Iteratice
- Small time frames
- Incremental
- Covergent
- People Oriented
- Collaborative

Manifesto: 

We are uncovering better ways of developing
software by doing it and helping others do it.
Through this work we have come to value:

Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
Working software over comprehensive documentation
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
Responding to change over following a plan

That is, while there is value in the items on
the right, we value the items on the left more.

Existing Agile Methods:

Puts emphasis on Value vs process or tools etc.
Agile is a way of doing processes and can exist within CMM

## Extemem Programming ("XP")
Most prominent
every day the team spends some time together talking about what they are doing
changes are more realistic, natural, and inescapable

## AUP (Agile unified process)
Simplified version of RUP
Phases:
  - Inception
  - Elaboration
  - Construction
  - Transition

Model
Implement
Test
Deploy
Config Managment
Project Management
Environment (culture of company)

## SCRUM
prioritized work is done
completion of backlog items
progress is explained
Agile software development

-------------------------------------

# SOA vs Modular Design
SOA is Modular Design but modular desing isn't neccessarily SOA

Software (all products) exist to solve a problem,or an inconvenience.

You use theory to minimize uncertainty.
[Known knowns, known unknowns, unknown knows, unknown unkowns.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/There_are_known_knowns)


VOCAB:
Note: Encapsulation, hiding login in a class.
Deliverable: what the client gets.


What has worked:
Informal relationships within the company.

Do you have a susyem that they are bulding or already aplanning , they can tell usthat, we can do this etc.
This is a independent set of eyes, and it doesn' tcost you anything.
Chit chat and chat for 15 to t10 minutes.
