
Control Theory - In engineering, when a system regulates itself. Pressure in a tube should be 10 if it becomes 9 the feeback loop tells the pressure to increase.

Flexible software development processes provide clear control mechanisms to manage the progress and quality.
Controle Theodry is used in both types Agile and Plan-Driven.

Traditional outcome control
- A priori specification
Flexible processes
- Outcomes emerge through development
- Activiely manage emergent outcomes
Two types of emergent outcome control mechanisms
- Scope boundaries
-- Limit amount of creativity
-- Time limit
-- Functional limit
- Ongoing feedback
-- User Reps
-- Market / Technical Feasibility

Example: Incremental Development.


# Incremental Development
Provides Intellectual control over complex system development.
Each Increment:
- Is an End-to-End System
- Adds functionality to previous increment
- Provides early and continuous quality assesment and customer feedback.


# Requirement Engineering
- It is hard to get started in a software development project.
- Gettting good requirements is the most difficult part of software development.
- After starting, the problem is knowing when we have enough requirements, the right requirements,
and some confidence that we have neraly all of the needed requirements.


A software System takes a set of inputs and transforms those inputs into a set of outputs (the transformations notion of software)
Softeare is a mathmatical function
Remember what reqs are.  What outputs are expected given a set of inputs.

Identification of SS (software system) inputs and Outputs.
What are the inputs needed to product the outputs the user needs.
What are the acceptable values the outputs can take on.
What are acceptable vlaues for the inputs.


# Properties of Good Requirements

Properties of good requiremnets must satisfy all system stakeholders:
- Technical stakeholders - Developers, testers
- Management stakeholders
- Customers
- End Users
Stake holder needs vs System reqs

## Understandable by end users
They are not often software engineers
Terminology used must afree with end-users understanding.
End users understanding must agree with ours.  Everyone must understand the same thing!

## Non-prescriptive
Must stipulate **what** must be done, not **how** or what **should** be done.
Requirements are what, not how
Data structures and algorithms belong in the design docs, not the reqs.


## Correct
objvisouly the behavior specified must be proper behavior.
There should be no ambiguity.
Not just what the reqs are today, but what they will do in the future as well.
We expect to use 3 terminal now, but 300 in the future.

## Concise
Keep it simple stupid.  
Occams Razor pilosophical argumants should be devoid of ornament.

## Clear and Unambiguous
Use natural language as precisely as possible

## Consistent
Requirements should not contradict each other.
Write reqs in the same form

## Traceable
Code should be traceable to the requirements. Why is this code here? and why.
We out to be able to find the code that supports a requirement quickly, if 
the requirement should change late in the development cycle.
Support for traceability starts during requirements specification.  Each requirement
should have a unique idenfitier.

## Modifiability
Its a reality that requirements can change (sometime frequently)
Form should support easy modification of reqs
Avoid "magic numbers" in request.  Instead use "symbolic" values and define the values else where.

## Testable
Requirements outght to be something that can be verified.  They ought to provide outputs that are measurable base on set of inputs.
Sometimes the testing process might impose requirements on the system that must be considered part of the reqs.
"Design for testability".

## Feasible
We most likely know one way to accomplsh this (if we are not sure we should be given an opportunity to prototype a solution.)

# System quality attributes
Requirements and speicifcations must include consideration of critical quality attributes as well as functional behaviors.
Requirements for:
- Performance
- Usability
- Security
- Reliability
- Availability
- Many other software systems -ilities

# Specification Approaches:
Formal sepcification language
Model-drive 
Architecture-centric
component
Hybrid

Sepcifications are much more formal
Can be uses to allow automation of
- Consistency checking
- Test generation
- Value Checking
- Design

Use fo formal specification language
- Safety critical
-- medical
-- nucleur
-- avionics
-- all high risk and vulnerable systems
- Examples:
- Cleanrroom box strucutres
- Squestion modeling

## Black Box Specification
External user-visible behavior in all possible circumstances
System transitions ordered by timing subscript i
Stimulus - Si
Stimulus History = S*i
Response - Ri
Stimulur to Response function behaviro - 
f(Si*) -> Ri
Example: Input date of birth, should export your age.

## State Box speicifcation
s = stimults
t = state
g(S, T) => (R, T)
Verifiy the correctness of the state box by deriving its blackbox.

## Clear Box Speicifcation
Create a procedure to implement the transition function
Use control structures:
- Sequence
- Alternation (If-Then_Else)
- Iteration(While-Do)
- Concurrency

## Model-Driven Development
Initially by OMG in early 2000s
PIM
PSM
DSM
UML


# Software Architecture
Overarching design templates that guide the hig-level design decisions for the sfotware system.
Architecture Styles - A particular codification of design selements that are formal arrangements.
Architectural Style:
 - Constrains design elements and arrangements
 - Has coherence
 - Describes system-wide organizatoinal properties
 - Is affeted by available materials.

## Architecture Elements
Components are the locus of computation and data storage
Connectors define the iteractions between components
Configurations are collections of interacting components and connectors
Constraints provide semantic understanding of the style requirements
Coordination is the glue that binds seperate activites to and enzenle (as distinguished from computation)
