# Cloud

Computing as a Utitlity (eg, electricity, water)
Key Characteristics
- The ilussion of infinite resources.
- Elimination of up-front-commitment.
- Ability to pay for use of computing resources on a short-term basis.
Cloud computing changes the economic equations of systems development and use.

The move to As a Service
"Think of what Salesforce.com did to CRM.  Now, imange if the same thing were to occur in the ERP market - it would be huge."
A lof of the industry standard business functions can move to a BPaaS and custom business functions could move to Iass.  Make a shift like that, we could see a day where business might not own manage any IT assets.

CaaS
Computing as a Service.

Mobile computing is made for the cloud
- Mobile extends the footprint and reach of the cloud.
Cloud INteroperability
- Majoralliances are working on Cloud standards for integration of offerings
The future is in the cloud
- All major SQ markets have Cloud products
- Integeration of local apps with Cloud apps
Security as a Service
- Trust in a AAS delivery models is growing.

Intelligent Networks
- Cloud requires complex networking infrastructure that leverages virtualization across multiple servers
- Faster connectivity and Mega-bandwidth demand
- Application and Location Aware
Collaboration and Social Networks
- Explot the promise of social network apps
Platform Proliferation
- Rapid growth in integrated plaftforms
Private Clouds
- Where do private clouds and public clouds meet?

Proposed cloud framework
Based on stategic and tactical choices that organizationas need to make as they embrace the cloud.
- How much data should be in the cloud?
To effectively capture this organization decision-making, we propose a six dimentional frameword with a sliding scale of distribution between internal and exteernal (cloud) locations.

The dimensions are:
- Applicaitons Executable software in the form of services.
- Data: Dat in the form of files, databases, data reps, data warehouses, etc.
- Computing: processing resources.
_ Storage: storage resources.
- Networking: Communication and transmissoin resources.
- Human Capital: Human resources.

The 10 obstacles/opportunities
1. Availability of a service
2. Data Lock-In
3. Data confidentially and auditability
4. Data transfer bottlenecks
5. Performanced unpredictability
6. Scalable storage
7. Bugs in large-sclae distributed systems
8. Sclaing quickly
9. Reputations fate sharing
10. Software licensing

Tehnical Research Challenges
- Desing of business transcations
_ Parallel processing coordination
- Analyics on the Cloud.

# Flow-Service Quality Methods of Specification and Design

FSQ Systems Engineering

Network-centric system realitites: complexity and survivability challenges
- Boundaryless systems with shifting connectivity
- Systems-of-systems integrations, uncertain COTS function and quality
- Unpredictable failures, disruptions, and compromises
- Complex asynchronous behavior blocks understanding
- Escalating threats and consequences

Approach
- Mathematical semantics first, engineering practices later
- Develop engineering foundations that address ystem realities
- Limit complexity and improve survivability with practical engineering methods


Flow
- Defines mission, user functions and quality attributes, refines into service uwses
Service
- Provides funtionality and quality attributes, refines into flows
Quality
- Attribute reqiurements attached to flows, service, attribute matches computed dynamically

3 Engineering concepts
1. Flow structures
- Uer task flows and their architecutre flow or service
2. Computations quality attrs
3. Dynamic flow management.

User task flow design
Network behavior specification
Component service specification

Manage flow structure as first-class artifcats in
- Acquisition
- Development
- Testing
- Operation
- Evolution
System implementation and operation must satisfy Flow Strucutre function and quality attrs.

FSQ Flow Foundations
- Flows of user taks ansd their refinements into architecute service uses are fundament egnieering bedrock for network centric systems.
- Mathematical semeantics of flow makes them determinitisitc to olimit complexit for human understanding despite async behavior of their service users.
- Flow structures requre srviviability design for Uncertainty Factors of failure, disruption, and compromise.
- Flow structures can be refined abstracted and verified with precision despite uncertainty of COTS behanvior.

REsearch Directions
- Complete Theory Development
- Flow structure Semantics
- Computational Quality Attrs


# Parallelism and Coordination
Parallel applicatoins are composed of interacting processes focused on specific tasks, but working toward a common goal. Coordination languages allow individual processes to wait for needed data, pursue local computations, and communicate any results to other processes

Cloud computing makes parallel programming relevant again and more accessible for a wide variety of applications.

JavaSpaces
support uncouple progamming.
Hadoop MapReduce.

Analytics on the cloud
Analytics has always had two components
- An off-line compnoet tht curnches numbrs to build predictive models and
- an on-line component that uses models that have been built
- Both components now have support fom vendors (e.w. Methmatica, Zementis)

Merv Adrian a reporter for CIO.com notes "By shifting their data warehouse into an agile virtualized infrastructure, T-Mobile now has flixble acces to more data and can analyze and rethink at will.  Like Fox, they're able to build analytical "sandboxes" on demand to discover new questions. Grab data to explore those questions. Tear it down and do it again."

Reseach opportunitites in Security from analytics on the cloud
- The cahllenge here is to strategically distribute data in this manner to minimize the data loss risk.
- Both horizontal (entire records being adssigned to different sservers) or verical (column in dat being assigned) distribution stratgeis, or hybrids, may be of interest of study.
- Encryption, distributed data minin are two areas that can inform some of this work.
- also, in areas such as health car with specific poicies and consumer laws, the design of compliant algorithms will be an important area.

THe future of cloud computing
- Providers will successfully navigate the obstablces and turn them into opporutnities
- Next gen systems will be designed an deployed via cloud.

Cloud computing will branch.  Complicated parallel procesing distributed system, and thin client interfaces (like cellphones) for interacting with those systems.


# Software Security
Vulnerabilities: efects or weaknessess in the design impmmetation or operations
Threat: adversaries are otiviate to exploit system vulnerability
Risks: are the liklihood that a vulneratbility wil be exploted
Security Foernsics: investigates security breajes
Security Prevention: Defends agains future attacks

Security is expensive and it has no value when there are no attacks, It is hard to justify cost.
There are no widely accepted metrics for evaluating system security.
The overall security of a system is only strong as its weakest link.
Security is a game of attack and counterattack.

The essence of cybersecurity is the protection of the items that you value in computerized applications:
- Hardware 
- Software
- Data
- Human Interfaces

Software is the active agent in computing systems that controls these valued assets
Software security, thus, is essential to achieve the goals of cybersecurity

Internet enable software applicatoins presetn the most common security risk.

Security Hieracrchies
- Seucrity must be built into software via best practives throughout the software development life cycle. This is software security.

Error- People make errors
Fault- Result of an error synonomous with defect or bug
Faulure - occurs because of fault.

Attack planning and execution
When an attack exposes a security vulnerability ask three questoins
- What fault would have caused this vulnerability
- What were the failure symptoms that would alert a tester to the presence of a vulnerability
- What testing technique would find this vulnerability

Social engineering is information securitys weakest link
The social engineer employs the same persuasive techniques the reset of us use every dat. We take on roles.  We try to build credibility. We call in reciprocal obligations.  Bu the social engineer applies these techniques in a manipulative, deceptive, highly unethical manner, often to devasting effects.

The principles of social engineering
- Trapping of the role
- Esatblish Credibility
- Force target into a helping role
- Distract from systematic thinking
- Momentum of compliance
- The desire to helo
- Attribution
- Liking
- Fear
- Reactance

Countermeasures
- Clear, consise security protocols that are enforced consistently
- Security awareness training
- Simple rules defining what information is sensitive
- Simple rule that says that whenever a requrester is asking for restricted access verify the requester.
- ENforce a data classicication policy

New paradigm for security testing
- Programmer lack practival means to determin the full functional behaviors of programms.
