# Software processes: planning development into each phase  vs Software Methods:  How you do it

Artifats have to be clearly defined and represented
and Artifacts is a way to demote a collection of methods.
How are you going to described that phase to someone who is going to build that phase.


Development discipline: well ordered application of processes and methods
- Consistency, repeatablility, and correctness are prices
focus is on the software, whos only responsibility is to deliver a software that is agreed upon.

Development Agility: creativity and adaptability to a changin environment
- Fast reaction time and focus on customer.
Focus on adapting for the customer, not always change, but be open to the idea.
Much more customer and business centric.

A good metric for software development success is if it is providing value for the customer.

# How do you balance between these two approaches.

Disciplined (CMMI, document-based, heavy process)
Agile (XP, tacit knowlege, light process)
Proponenets of both are believers, many un-belivers are perplexed.

## What is discipline

Foundation for any successful endeavor
Provides strength and comfort
Creates well-organized memories, history, and experience.

In disciplined reward is in the beginning, the end is frustrating because your product is no longer what is needed.

## What is agility
- Counterpart of discipline
- Releases and invents as opposed to ingraining and strengthening
- Applies memory and history to adjust to new environemnts and take advantage of new opportunites.

In agile frustration is in the beginning, reward is in the end, with a useful product.

## Successful projects probably need both
- Discipline without agility leads to bureaucracy and stagnation
- Traditional Plan-driven development
  -- "Feels like we're spending more time writing documents than producing software"
- Agility without discipline leads to uncontrolled and fruitless enthusiasm
  -- "Can we really scale to do big projects without comprehensive documentation"

Putting together multi-disciplinary teams is good for knowledge sharing.


# Perplexity

Multiple definitions
  - Quality: Customer stisfaction or compliance?
Distinguishing method user from method misuse
  - Claiming XP use when simply not documenting
  - CMM level 4 memorrial library of 99 2inch binders
- Overgeneralize
  - XP is Agile; CMM is Plan-driven
Claims of universality
  - Pace of IT change is accelerating and Agile methods adapt to change better than disciplined methods, therefore, Agile methods will prevails.

Early success stories
- Chrysler project that successfully birthed XP was later cancelled.
- Cleanroom has never made it into the mainstream.

- Only is last 20 years software has been realized as not an "engineering discipline" alone.
  -- Because each software you create is unique.

# Comparison is difficult but 4 areas have clear differences

# When to choose which method.

## Application

Primary Goals
A: Rapid value, responsive to change
D: predictability, stability, high asssurance

Size:
A: Small to Medium
D: Large

Environment
A: Turbulent, high change
D: Stable, requirements defined

## Management

Customer Relations
A: Dedicated, collocated
D: Contractual
A: Trust thoguh working software and participation
D: Trust thoguh process maturity evaluations

Planning and Control
A: Means to an end
D: Anchor processes, communication

Project Communications
A: Tacit, interpersonal knowledge, poor scalibility
 - N devs require N(N-1)/2 communication paths
D: Explicit, documented knowledge

## Technical

Requirements
A: Adjustable, informal stories
D: Formally baselines, complete, consistent, traceable, testable specifications

Development:
A: Simple Desing
D: Planning, Architecture-based design

Testing:
A: Automated, test-driven
D: Planned, requirements-driven

## Personal

Customers:
A: CRACK customers thorughout development.
D: CRACK customers early
  - CRACK == Collobarative, Representative, Authorized, Commited, and Knowledgable.

Developers:
A: Heavy mix of high caliber thorughout
D: Heavy mix early with low capability later

Culture:
A: Many degrees of Freedom (thrive in chaos)
D: Clear policies and procesdures (Thrives on order)

# Plan drive misconceptions
Are all bureaucratic
Having documents guratentees compliece with plans
success with a lack of talented people
high mutiruty guarentees success
No penealties in applytin a plan-drive process when change is forseeable

# Agile misconceptions
Does not plan.
requires uniformly talented people.
make the slope of cost-tochange vs time curve flat.
YAGNI is a universally safe assumption and wont alienate your customers.

# Software project cost estimation

- Extremely difficult error-prone tasks
- Essential skill for project managers
- Threee basic techniques
  -- Expert Judgetment - Use your most experienced analyst
  -- Analytic Models - All models are wrong, some are useful
    --- COCOMO II
  -- Analogy - Case Based reasoning
    --- find a previous project that resembles the new project.


# Estimation process

1. Estimate Size
2. Effort
3. Schedule
4. Present estimate range and refine it
