What is the best way to ogranize software develoment teams?
How to pseed up development, reduce costs, and improve software quality?
How to achieve the quickest development effor, lowest effective dev cost, and best available product quality?

People are an orgs most important asset.
Tasks of a manager are people oriented.  Unless there is some understanding of people, management will be unsuccessful.
Software engineering is primarily a cognitive activity.  Cognitive limitations effectively limit the softwaree process.

You need to create a culture where cooperation is awarded.

Problem solving
Requires the integration of differenet types of knowledge (cmomputer, task, domain, organization).
Development of a model o fhte solution and testing of this model against the problem.
Representation of this model in an appropriate notations of programming language.

The people capability maturity model
Five stage model
- Initial ad-hoc people management.
- Repeatable olicies developed for capability improvment.
- Defined.  Standardised people mgmt across org.
- Managed. quantitative goals for people management in place.
- Optimizing.

Factors effecting productivity

Application domain experience
process quality
project size
technology support
working environment

Quality and Productivity

All metrics based on volumne/unit time are flaws because they do not take quality into account.
Productivity may generally be increased at the cost of quality.
It is not clear how productivity/quality metrics are related.
If change is constant then an approach based on counting lines of code is not meaningful.

Software quality managment

Usability (Customer experience) & Tech-side (quality of code)

Concerned with ensuring that the rquired level of quality is achieved in a software product
Involves defininf appropriate quality standards and procedures and ensuring that these are followed
Should aim to develop a 'quality culture' where quality is seen as everyones responsiblity.

What is quality?
Quality, simplistically, means that a product should meet specifications
This is tough for software
- Tension between customer quality reqs (efficiency, reliability, etc) and developer quality reqs (maintainability, reuseability, etc).
- Somme quality reqs are difficult to specify.
- Specs are usually incomplete and inconsistent.

Quality management activities

Quality assurance
- establish organisational procesduers and standards for quality
Quality plannng
- Select applicable procedures for a project and modify as required
Quality Control
- Ensure the procedures are being followed
Quality managment should be sperate from project management to ensure independence.

(Re)designing software production


Optimizing software production
- Optimization must address composite architectire of software production
- Local optimization of any cmoponent does not guarentee global optimality of software production
- Diagnostic analyses and transformation heuristics applied to composite architectuaral models lead to optimization opportunities.

Software Development Team Leader

"Jack of all trades"
maintainer of systems conceptual integrity
Part of team
- Set of people with complimentary skills
- Commited to common
  - purpose
  - performance goals
  - approach
- Holde each other accountable
Life of team leader is long series of locally suboptimal decisions made partly in the dark
- Sometimes painful

Desired Skill Set

Software dev skills
Domain expertise
Communicator
Strategist 
Consultant
Leader
Technologist
Cost estimator
Cheerleader
Politician
Sales person

Must understand nuances of software development
- Things we have been talking about
Need to not be world class software programmers
Should understand ramifications of architectural choices
- Not live in ivory tower
- Some architectuaral choices constrain implementations options
- Some implementation-level techniques & tools constrain architectural choices

Domain Experts
SE is not enough
Problem domain nuances
  - Maturity
  - Stability
  - System user profile

Communicators
- Leader half the job
Must listen to stakeholders, explain architecture, negotiate compromises
Need good comm skills
- writing
- speaking
- presenting

Team leader communicate with 
Managers
Developers
  Convince them the decision is effective
  Justify suboptimal choices
  Listen to prblems
    - tools
    - mthods
    - design choices
  Other software architects
    - endrue conceptual integrity
    - ensure desired system properties and evolution
Other Software Architects

Leaders must recognize developers are their primary "customer"
Developers
- Goals do not match architects
- Not focused on making architecture successful
- Focused on 
  - Satisfying functional, quality, and scheduling requirements
  - Subsystems for which they are responsible

Pitfalls of softwware team leader
- Imbalance of skills
  - Lack of SE expertise
  - Lack of Domain expertise
- Lack of authority
  - Team acts as committee
- Life in ivory tower
- Confusing tools/techniques/methodologies with architectures
- Procrastination
