# Design, Implementaion and Testing

Purposes of Design
- The design activity transforms the specification to a design artifact.
- The end purpose of the design is to product detail and information suitable for the coding activity
- The end-user of the design are programmers and testers

## What is a design?
- Step-wise refinement provide intellectual control by delaying complex system details until an appropriate level of detail is achieved.
- In short, complexity should be pushed down into the details where the problem can be subdivided and the complexity can be looked at as it relates to each of the individual subsystems.

## Information Hiding
- Information hiding can be though of as a "need to know" approach to data and algorithms.
- Only code or modules that really need to know how data is manipulated (algorithms) or how it is represented (data structures) should have visibility.
- Why? This approach helps prevent designers from designing in dependencies on data implementation.

## Designers Art and Craft
- Designer acquires experience as time goes on.
- Very seldom is the "art" actually codified, but there are some fundamental rules and notions that can be taken advantage of, but these rules are NOT foolproof, nor are they a substitute for training, thought and good judgement.

## Common Services
- Its oftern helpful to identify common service functions early, such as sting handling functions.
- Common services are functions that are needed by more than one subsystem or module.
- Early identification allows us to prevent multiple implementation of the same function.  This would destroy our systems "cohesion".

## Major Data Structures
- Major data structures fall into two camps: Permanent and temporary.
- The permanent data structures are the data structures (such as global data) that will persist for the entire durartion of the system activity.
- The temporary data may be common data structures that are used to pass information between routins (such as parameter lists) that will be discarded after it has served its functions.

## Major Algorithms
- The major algoriths are the procedures that do the work of the system
- For a payroll system, analgorithm that computes witholding for taxes is cleary a major algorithm.
- There can be multiple functions that involve major algorithms: if the payroll system is for international use, the witholding algorithm would probably be different for each country.

## High-level ("Architectural") Design
- Architectue is usually the product of the designers experience.  After building printer firmware for several years a designer would call upon experience of previous printer systems to build it next
- Dev orgs may have pre-defined architecture systes
- Architectural design is typically presented in the top levels of the system heirarchy and in the effective use of commons services.

## Traceability Matrices
- Traceability Matrcies allow us to track the partitioning of the requirements into the individual sub systems.
- In addition, these matrices allow us to find which requirements are fulfilled by each subsytems.
- Remembe, a single requirement may be assigned to more than on subsystem.

## Subsystem Interfaces
- In general, it is best to minimize the number of interfaces to each subsystem.  This can help reduce "coupling", but not always. At least it can localize coupling prblems to select locations.

## Enviroment Interfaces
- The environment has an interface, sometimes outside of our control.
- And example would be operating system calls for on off-the-shelf library (Like a string handling library, etc.).

## Detailed Design
- Essentially decomposition of substems into work packages or software modules for the code-smiths (programmers).
- Focuses on the final step of decomposition, but still leaves room for the code-smiths "art".
- Stops short of code itself.

## Defining module interfaces
- Module interfaces are essentially of two types: Internal and External.
- Visibility of internal are unique to module itself.
- External interfaces should be limited to expose only the functionality that is required by the rest of the subsystem or system.

## Sepcifying the module functions
- Usually module sfunctions can be easily specified: public function names, input params, output params, and error codes.
- Ocassionally, when a tickish or unique algorithm is needed, it can be specified useing "psuedocode".
- Be careful to not over specify: the code-smaiths have skill sets that willbe brought to bear that add value.  We ofter gain little or nothgin by over-specifying modules.

## Module Documentation
- The documentation for the modules will vary from group to group .

## Dieter Rams Principles of good design.
- Innovative
- Makes a product useful
- Aestetic
- Make product undrstandable
- Unobtrusive
- Honest
- Long lasting
- Through down to the last detail
- Environmentally friendly
- Little design as possible

## Component Base Software design (CBSD)
- Business Objectives
  - Time-to-market
  - Adaptability
  - etc
- Information Sytems Objectvies
  - productivity
  - quality
  - cost reduction
  - etc

## Commercial Off-The-Shelf Components (COTS)
When you buy off the shelf you usually have to modify it.

- Understand
- Provision
- Assemble
- Implement

Component Providers -> to solution assembler -> Solution user.

## Units of Exchange (for components):
- Identify
- Catalog
- Sell 
- Execute
- Build 
- Design


## Component Market
- Everything is a component
  - Do we need to be more specific or generic
  - Difficult to talk about "issues" of the market
  - Diffiul to convince consumers when the term seems so broadly applied.
- Is it 
  - Component Market
  - Resuable asset market
  - Package software market
  - The "Components that encapsulate their implementation, only accessible via published interaces, binary executables, etc..." market.

## What could fuel growth?
- The operating Platform
  - Operating environment geared towards comonents
  - ORACLE/IBM/etc - EJB
  - MICROSOFT - COM+
    - MSDN Component resources
  - Making it easier to build componnets
  - fraeworkd based platofmr
- Highers value components
  - fameworkds
- Standardization
  - B2B process requires consensus
  - stardized idunstry framwork
- Cheaper produciton of software

## What might inhibit market growth?
- Commoditization
 - growth in volume not in dollars
- Platform expansion
- Technology centric
- Consumer desire solutions not component


#  Service Oriented Architecture (SOA)
- SOA is a variation of component based development that includes integrations of web services.
- SOA is a key to interoperability and flexibility reqs for on-demand business.

## SOA connection technoligies
- XML
- SOAP
- UDDI (How do you know there is a service available? Use a registry.)
- JSON
- Protocol Buffers

## Web services
- An application function packaged as a resusable component and avialable via a web interface.

Class Diagrams

Service Model.  You would seperate the services into the name of boxes and write down the "logic" each service would handle.

## Technical challenges
- Data size explosian (XML tagging and textual representations)
- Performance issues
- Protocol Stew
- E-utilities
- Quality of Service
- Synamically configurable web services.

## SaaS
- less expensive than on-premises software (True, short-term)
- fater to implement (True for simple reqs)
- prices as a utility (false in most cases)
- does not integrate with on premis apps (False)
- only for simple basic reqs (False, but there are complexity limits)

## Coding and Implementation
- Writing software code is the essence of development (duh!)
- What is Code? Bloomber Business.
- Excellent survery of current state-of-the-art programming langauages and environments.

## Programming Languages 
- Plethora of languages

## Testing Objectives
- Find dfects
- Maximaize bug count
- block premature product releases
- Help managers make ship/noship decisions
- Minimize technical support costs
- Assess conformance to specification
- Conform to regulations
- Minimize safety-related lawsuit risk
- Access quality
- Verify correctness of the product

- *You cannot test quality into a software systems!*.

## Testing during requirements
- Customer/Stakehilder iteracionts
- Inspect the reqs for:
  - Correctness - Do we have the right requirements
  - Completeness  Is everything there?
  - Compatability - Are they consistent?
  - Achievable - Can they be designed and implemented?
  - Reasonable - Do reqs tradeoffs make sense
  - Testable - Can we know if product meets reqs
- Develop Customer Acceptance Test Cases.


## Testing during design
- Architecture reviews
- Design inspections
  - Structural Design
    - Top down decomp
    - Bottom up compo
    - Data design
    - Logic design

## Testing during implementation
- Code inspections
- Raceability from reqs
- Automated tesets
- etc

## Test systems/subsytem integration Teesting
- Use incremental Development to manage comlexity of integration
- Top down integration
  - Drivers and Stubs
- Bottom Up integrations
  - Harnesses
- Customer Acceptance Testing
  - Beta testing - quationable values

## Testing in maintenence and enhancement phase.
- Maintenence accounts for ~70% of software cost.
  - Bugs found during operations
  - Enhancements required by the cusomter
- Schedualed relsease will include both bug fixes and new features
  - avg 2 scheduled releases per year.
  - emergency releases for critical fixes.
- Regression testing - Run all previous test cases again to ensure that fix does not have side effects.

## 4 Phases of testing
- Modeling the softwares environment.
  - Software Interfaces
  - Through testing must include both valid and invalid inputs
- Selecting test scenarios.
  - Goal is best test data adequancy criteria
- Running and evaluating test scenarios.
  - Automate as much as possible
  - Scenario evaluation - Did the test result in expected output.
  - Regressoin Testing (prioritize and minimize regressoion tests)
- Measuring testing progress.
  - Testing Metrics are controversial (is high bugs good or bad?).
  - Coverage metrics are useful.
    - Bug Discovery Stability.
    - Testability.
    - Reliability models.
      - Operational profiles of usage.
      - Credible track record.

## Introduction to software inspection
- Look for bugs from the beginning, while developing
1. Planning
2. Overview
3. Preperation
4. Examination Metting
5. Rework
6. Follow-up

Objectives: Find defects
Inspection Teams: 3 to 6 members include author
Roles: Moderator, Recorder, Reader, Domain Experts, Testers, Reqs Engineers
2 Hour meetings, Time limits.
Outputs: List of defects and an inspection report.

## Formal Technical Peer Reviews
Walkthroughs, milestone reviews, etc.

## Test oracles
- Check the output of a program against specification.
- Autmated testing must included automated Oracles.

## Interface testing
## Boundary Value Tests
## Structural Testing

## Testing.

Different parts of coverage testing
- Control flow testing: Relects numerous points on a diagram and each path (or flow) is checked to assure that it passed.
- Path coverage: Cover all paths of logic.  Ensures that the control flow tests take all the possible paths in existence.
- Branch coverage: Test each branch of an logical statement (Think if or switch or break and non break in a loop).
- Data-flow coverage: Foxusts on the data not the flow: Think of the "define/set" and "use" relations as nodes.

Choosing a particular Testing Method:
- Practical restraints very often incluence the choice of methods:
- Resrouces available: how much time is available.
- Feasibility: How much time available?
- Process: Is the testing process mature enough to support the method.

Automated Testing
- Automated testing falls into two areas: automated application of tests and automatic test generation.
- Automatic test generation uses a formal representation.
