### Syllabus Review

The final project deliverable is supposed to be a power point presentation.
Presentation should be for a CIO who has not heard any of the information.

<hr>

# Data Analytic Thinking: Some context and history

Data Mining term was created in the lates 90s early 2000s

How data driven are you when thinking about things?

CRM = Customer Relationship Management

Small business (Local wine store) has a 1-1 relationship with clients, recommending products to individiaul customers based on years of knowledge of the customer.
- This is CRM

Why wine?  Its a product that looks almost exactly the same, but in reality people make very different purchasing decisions, particularly to connoisseur.

2 approaches to scale (1 Billion people):
- I cannot do it: one size fits all, take it or leave it.
- Segmentation: Break the offering into a few segments and offer those

How can large firmst with millions of customers do this?
- Impossible (almost) to know all individually
- Through analytical CRM

Now we are trying to truley get that 1-1 relationship.

Many years ago, data analytics was used in finance and weather predictions.

Two domains:
- Making money (If there is an opportunity to make money, Wall Street will find a way) People who talk dont make money, people who make money dont talk.
- Saving lives (People going out in shipsw ith bad water, people could die)

Most examples are in Marketing

<hr>

Business Intelligence (BI) is a borader notion than Data Mining (DM).
- What does it mean for a business to be "Intelligent", and
- What role does technology play a role in this?

DM is the analytical part handling scoreing, prediction.
BI tools often provide dashboards of information from data warehouses / databases.

BI is usually reporting, but now there is a trend where that definition is becoming broader.

One of the first data mining companies (micro strategy) made a product for Best Buy that pulled from the transaction databases and based on what the executive decided certain attributes would be showed to the store managers at the beginning of the day.
Something like, "Hey manager your store is not selling a lot of laptops but all the other ones are, whats up with that?"

**Domain Experts are important to deciding what data should be mined / reported**

If you look at modern systems like Tableau:

- There is more visualization.
- Much broader access.
- User interfaces are becoming very GUI driven.
- Integrating predictive models. (Citizen data science: Domain experts can create the models that they need).
- Integration into B. Processes.
- Push vs Pull (Pull is the user chooses what to see, the push is a way for the BI system to push out important information to people at the right time when they need to see it.)

**There is a big focus on realtime solutions.**

There is alot of focus on Intelligent Alerts.  (Potentially profitable market currently)
Cyper Security is a large idea of alerts.

IBMs watson tool is a very user friendly tool people are really starting to use now.

<hr> 

### Helathcare/Science (80s)

**Medline has papers going back many years.** (Good for your research)

A discovery that fish oil may be used to treat Raynauds disease.
The finding was made by a scientist who mined the Medline healthcare articles data to look for undiscovered links between terms.

If there are
- Many articles that contain "Fish Oil" and "Bloo Viscosity"
- Many articles that contain "Blood Viscosity" and "Raynauds Disease"
- But almost no article that contains "Fish Oil" and "Raynauds Disease"

Another one he found was that magnesium can help migraine headaches.

Then this pattern may be indicative of undiscovered scientific knowledge (i.e. Why are there no papers that used fish oil for Raynauds disease)

Count(A, B) = High
Count(B, C) = High
Count(A, C) = Low

A <- disease
B <- symptom
C <- treatment

This information was retreived from ontologies.

He had a lot of False Positives.

Called his paper: Undiscovered Public Knowledge.

<hr>

### Diapers-Beer (90s)

- On Friday evenings, shoppers who buy diapers also buy beer (Supermarket transaction database)
- A Data mining story about an example pattern that may be learned from supermarket transaction data
  _ The story has been told for 15 years yet there is no conclusive evidence for the exact client who discovered this.
  - Likely an urban legend, but has important learning objectives (and similar patterns have been found and used in several retail applications)

A popular blog is called kdnuggest.com (started around 1993)

Might want to call this Data Art instead of Science.  Its not as much of a hard science as the pure science.

In predictive models with data (say consumers defaulting on loans) Given a consumer can predict if this person will default.
Most of the toolkits have many predictive models available (Regression, decision trees, nueral networks, support vector machines)
If you can keep aside as much data as possible and the model is still often correct than it is probably the best model.

Usually predictive algorithms do what is called a "search".  The number of possible ways things are related is infinite.
A good way to understand if a model is producing a "False Discovery" test the models as much as possible.
People like to keep about 50% of the data unseen to create the model. (Rule of thumb, a tough standard)
If you dont like it, do a sensitivty analysis (keep progressively keeping 10%, 20%, 30% out, keep going until your model fails)

A data scientist focuses on finding the truth and telling it as it is.
It takes the same amount of time to find nothing as it takes to actually show a result.
Focus on if a model is evaluated solidly not how the black box of the method works.

Matched sampling: Control group and Experiment group are made similiar.

You can buy info from third parties about how many people live in a house, their ages, etc.
Companies try to take big advantage of when you have a child.

<hr>

### The Netflix Prize

In the 2000 Netflix was one of the first companies to release a huge data set of users and ratings (anonymous obviously) and use this training set we are giving you and try to predict this test set.
Netflix kept a huge list of test sets
If the prediction you make is 10% higher than their algorithm, they would give you $1 million dollars.
Non exclusive license.  It took 3 years to get over 10%.  The top two teams had to join together and got to 9.98% then they finally brought group 3 in and they finally got 10%.

The final model was the combination of over 100 algorithms / models being combined.
Even today as long as you predict well, people will be happy about it.

Fraud Detection do prediction.

<hr>

### Online Experiments

Amazon.com pioneered the use of online experiments to optimize algorithms
Ron Kohavis HiPPO principle (Highest Paid Persons Opinion)
He built an online AB Platform.

Amazon drives a lot of sales via recommendation. About 20% of Amazons sales purportadly.
Big hurdle was to test predictive models took a very long amount of time.  If you can test something quickly, then the value of datascience becomes exponential.
AB testing fully democratizes ideas and allows as to AB test and see what the best idea is and choose regarless of the HiPPO.

Pandora team shows how their recomendation engine works:  We have 20ish people in our team.  We have people who can code and people who like music.  Sometimes only muscians, but sometimes musicians that code.
They go out party and drink.  Then the muscians and coders get together and then they come up with some crazy idea, then by 1am they have written code then they deploy it at 6am.
Then 5% of listeners get the new coded algorithm.  If they algoithm is working then we know if it does work by 7am.  If they see a bunch of skips then they quickly back off the idea and play the people their favorite songs.

Today alot of people really like logistic regression models and they really like SAS as well.

<hr>

### Transition in Analytics

A profound shift: From Discovery -> Predictive -> modeling -> organizational mindset

### Big Data

Definition worth pondering, it offers some value into potential/challenges.

Volume: Self-explanatory
Variety: Social media text, emoticons, audio
Velocity: Clicksteam activity, FB Data
Veracity: User reviews
Vision (Balajis): Big data helps us see things that are obvious but not necessarily in the open (Car bumps app for identify the pot holes)

Can you predict how things will happen in the elections?

Companies give their product to a 20-ish influential bloggers and give them a nice vacation etc and then they leave good reviews.  Particularly products that take 3+ years to develop and million to billions of dollars.

### Importance of the Scientific Method

DM or BI is not just a tool - its a way of thinking.  SCientific, data driven decision making.
However, think.  Dont rush to mine.
- Several ways in which data cen be misused or just badly used, sometimes to disaserous consequences.

### Why "Data Mining" now

All obvious factors (computing, data, networking)
A bigger sift in business itself: every company is in some form or the other in service business.  Here "Information is power" and businesses need to think hard about what information to collect and how to use it optimally.
- Think of various traditional businesses, can you give examples of them as "service" businesses and on the same thought, can you think about what information they should collect and how to use it?
- Hyatt? Toyota?

Also as "infomediaries" first collect information useful for other companies needs.

In Tampa area there is a company called Catalina Marketing.  They print companies on the back of a receipt.
Credit Card companies are very good at making money off of their data.
When asked for data they site privacy but in reality they dont want to kill the golden goose.

Rather than thinking about what data they track, what new data can they track and how can it help.  They see if the mini bar bought corona, then they know next time this person comes stock the mini-bar with corona.
Also in the evening they leave chocolates and track if you eat it or not.

One company Google bought is a company that can predict realtime prices of stores.

<hr>

### Themes

- Value of *real-time*
- Creativity -> problem formulation (When dealing with data you have to not only ask: "what is the right question", but also "what is the right problem forumlation")
- False Discoveries & Overfitting
- Huge interest in "Discovery" -> "Gold Nuggets hidden in mountains of Data" 
- Focus on what is "Correct"? 
    - Look if it always holds in the future.
    - Explain the concept by Theories (Ideally you want to do both of these)  
- Ensembles "or" mixed models (Using combined models you usually get higher accuracy) Ensembles work usually because the phenomenon is complex and most likely doesnt behave in the same way as one model, therefore if you combine multiple models you get closer to how the phenomenon performas in realife.
- Importance of Evaluation (You have to evaluate models and patterns in as stringent of a way as possible)
- Experementation (the only way to prove that something works)
    - Random groups is a good thing.
- Predictions
- New Data! How can you bring in new data to the picture that was not there before.
