Assumption #3: E has a normal distribution
Violated if nonnormal errors or outliers
Robuse- Slight to moderate departutes from normality have listtle mipacet on inferesesd

Also violated if outliers
Extremely large/small residuals, due to 
1: Invalid measurement (eg coding error)
2. Skewness (non normality)
3. Measurement form another population
4. Misspecified model
5. change/unexplainable causes

You cannot state with certaintity that you should ALWAYS throw out an outlier.

Detecting y-outliers: Plot your residuals against the predicted value of Y
Detecting x-outliers: Plot your residuals against the independent variables

If the outlier is very influential then we may want to throw it out.

Text Book Page 413.

residual is y - y-hat
Standardized Residual: Z-Score
residual / s = Z-Score

Sometimes outliers can have extreme effects on an analysis.  First find out have influential it is.

## How to identify influencial observations

y-hat is predicted value

X-outliers - "Leverage" of each obs.
y-hat = a function of xs

### Method 1
Leverage how influential an individual observation Yj is on its own prediction value on Yhat.

k == number of variables in model
n == sample size

hj = 2(k+1)/n

Hs are diagnols of the matric

Will not detecting errors on Y.  As it only examines the Xs.

Hat Diagonal H is the leverage value

### Method 2
Examine jackknife statistics
Deleted residual: dj = (yi - y-hat(i)):  The predicted value of the y when the y is not present in the model.
Student deleted residual: di* = (yi - yhat(i))/Sd  Just standardizing by dividing by the standard deviation.  How many standard deviations from mean
Difference in fitted values (yhat - yhat(i)):  Comparing predicted with all the data to predicted without the ith observation. 
Difference in betas: Betahatj - Betahatj(i)

You can standardize everything lik the student deleted residual.  Devide by the standard deviation.
Influense w/respect to y-values: "large" values

### Method 3
Method 3: examine "Cook's distance"
combines leverage with jackknife
If the value is above the 50th percentile (numbers bigger than 1)

**NOTE: All 3 mthods may not detect the same influential observations.**

Textbook page 421


# 4th assumption independent errors
