Class 4:

# Pre class questions

You cannot have more columns than you do observations

      DF 
      --
Model k
Error n-1-k
Total n-1

rule of thumb: observations >= 10 times Betas (so another words you want 10x as many observations as variables)

CIS: 1034 for Wednesdays class.

Multi-Colliniarity: have to be careful about variables that have strong correlations with each other.

## Class Notes

Have to be careful about judging the importance of a variable
Particularly because they are not measured the same way.
Age and # of bidders for example

High coeff of variation tells us that the standard deviation is high compared to the mean of y.

Partial correlation coefficients
r1.2 correlation of y with x1 after accounting for x2
and vice versa

Alternative Theories:
1. Price increases linearly with Age & # Bidders.
2. Rate of increase of Price with Age is steeper for a larger # Bidders.

When you have two quantitative independent variables multipled each other its a 2nd Order model,
but most researchers think of curvolinear relationships.

Interactoin terms: multiplying two independent varibles together
In other words.  The slope changes as one of the values changes. (not the best wording)

Important t-test, H0: b3 = 0.
You should do a t-test on interaction terms alone because if the slope is zero, the new beta would be worthless.

F-Values are based on how many terms in the model.  You cannot really compare F models directly.
F-Values really just say that this model is better than no model at all.

Adding an interation term we know 100% that the r-squared will stay the same or go up.

## SAS commands:

REG (regression model)
GLM (general linear model) lets you create interaction terms in the definition of the PROC.

