You cannot compare r-Squared values when you have transformed the y variable.

BoxCox test for evaluating models.

antilog is e^values

Testing portions of a model.
Usually terms beyond 2nd-order are not practcal.


Comparing Models:
Compare the two models

R^2, adjR^2, 2str_d, F, p-value

R^2 always goes down if you pull out independent variables.

If you have nested models its easy to test the value of adding values
Set beta4 and beta5 to zero (the two curvature terms) if at least one of those betas is non-zero you can reject Ho.

## Tests to compare nested models

### Partial F-tests or Nested model F-tests or Subset F-tests.
Testing if a group of betas are equal to zero
THe only way to get an automatic test of the value of interaction terms in SAS
Any term you want to be part of the null hypotheis needs to specified.

PROC REG;
MODEL y=x1 x1sq sdum x1sex x1sqsex;
x1: TEST x1, x1sq, x1sex, x1sqlsex;
INTERACT: TEST xqsex x1sqsex

Numerator DF should be the same number of terms you are specifying to test.

Note1: Nested model (partial) F-test on a single Beta is quicalent to a t-test on that beta
Note2: partial f-test on all Betas in Complete model is equivelant to a global F-test on thos beta)
Note3: If "fail to reject Ho: B4 = B4 = 0" better to use the more pasimonious model, ie., reduced (smalled) model.

## Tests to compare non-nested models

### Restricted model
conduct test: Ho: B1 = B2 (equal slopes)
restricted:
E(y) = beta0 + beta1x1 + beta1x2 = beta0 + b1(x1 + x2)
unrestricted:
E(y) = beta0 + beta1x1 + beta1x2 = beta0 + b1(x1 + x2)

Fit both models get SSEr and SSEu


Question of the day: How can we use a nested model to make life super easy.
