If you want to test one dumy value.  You take out the alpha for that particular dummy variable after youve accounted for others.

If you want to test if a particular term drop it out

The reduced model is better.  

Once you account for brand fuel does not a significant effect on the dependent variable.

A model with just the brand variable is no worse than a model without it.

The last row of a type 1 sums of squares result will be the same as a type 3 sums of squares results.

Once I account for fuel brand is significant.

Drop the two fuel terms to get the reduced models.
One brand term.  Drop that out of complete model that gives us a p Value
Interaction row test the interaction term take it out and get that p value.
Once I account for main effect fuel and main effect brand, do I need to account for interaction terms?  Yes because the p value is < .0001

Type 3

# Modeling models with Quantitative and Qualitative variables

QN: Experience
QL: Gender and Tenure

complete 1st order model
E(y) = b0 + b1x1 
          + b2x2 + b3x3 + b4x2x3 
          + b5x1x2 + b6x1x3 + b7x1x2x3

Stage one: write a model taht only involve the QT terms.
Stage two: add terms for QL variables.
Stage three: add all permutations of stage one and stage two terms

How would you interpret b7x1x2x3?
The relationship of x1 on the dependent variable is dependent on x2 and x3

complete 2nd order model is the same except add sqauren QN terms to the first stage and they obvisouly carry on to the third row.

2 * 2 means:  because there are two QL variables.
Not restricting the curvature or slopes because of interaction terms.

Nested F Test dropping all those terms out (if you want to test for curvature)

Theory: 1 model for each theory
Exploratory: "build-up" or "build-down"
Build-up: start with a simple model, add terms
Build-down: Start with a complex model, remove terms
Advantages/Disadvantages? 
Examples (cases 3 and 5 in text)
