Multiple regression lets us distinguish the effects of each X on Y.  As long as it is a first order model.

Do not dismiss variables as useless just because they do not work in a specific model.

Bo + B1x1 + B2x2 + B3x1x2
slope of y-x1 line = b1 + b3x2
slope of y-x2 line = b1 + b3x1

Its going to very rare when you will have a x1 and x2 equal to zero.

Curvilinear (2nd-order) Model
Bo + B1x + b2x2 (second order, or quadratic model)

Concave upward, Concave downard.
Downward curve is tested if the Beta is < 0.

y = x^2 is a parabola

E(y) = bo + b1x + b2x^2

Bp represents y-intercept
b1 represents the shift parameter of curve
b2 represents the rate/direction of curvature
Global F-test, Ho:B1  =B2 = 0
Important t-test Ho:B2 = 0 (test for curvature)

A global p-test with a good value means that this model is better than no model at all.
B1 does not represent a slope (but rather a shift of the curve)

Danger of extrapolation with model.
Since this is fitting a parabola if we start picking values of Xs that are way outside of the sample data.

*When interpreting betas.  You hold all other betas constant.*
Start with an overall F-Test

"multiplicative" model

Beta associated with multiplicative (%) change in y for every 1-untiy in increase in x

ln(y) = Bo + b1x1 + b2x2 + ... + e
% change is measured by {exp(bi) - 1} x 100%

ln(y) = bo + b3x3 + e
where x3 is a dummy variable

y = exp{ln(y)} = anti-log of log(y)

x3 = 0: lg(y) = b0      -> y = exp(b0)      = e^b0
x3 = 1: lg(y) = b0 + b3 -> y = exp(b0 + b3) = e^b0*e^b3

What is the best way to detect gender bias

Is B3 zero and B7 zero or closet to zero
